[MUSIC]
Hello everyone, this week we are going to
continue our experimental physics journey.
The primary focus this time will
be comparison of two hypothesis
through the measurement of
some real-world parameters.
We'll follow analysis strategy
that LHCb experiment, for
example, uses for hunting for rare decays.
We'll see how machine learning can be
used to improve sensitivity of research,
and examine some essential boundary conditions
that restrict the use of
an arbitrary predictive model.
One of the most extraordinary scientists
of all the times, Richard Feynman.
I hope you've already had a chance to
appreciate his way of transforming
doodles into a powerful
communication tool find on diagrams.
He used to say that present situation
in physics as if we know chess,
but we don't know one or two rules.
In fact,
the situation is a bit more complicated.
Now, we understand that there are a whole
lot of things going on with dark matter
and dark energy, and we don't have a clue
how many rules we are actually missing.
However, as long as we're talking
about chess as a metaphor for
a scientific research,
it works quite nice.
We have to play various games
scenarios to figure out what
kind of rules apply to our figures.
In our case, instead of chess figures,
we have standard model particles.
Just let's recap.
The standard model of particle physics
describes what universe is made of,
and how it holds together.
It rests on two central ideas.
The first one,
all matter is made of particles,
and these particles
interact with each other
by exchanging other particles
associated with fundamental forces.
The essential grains of
matter are fermions,
and the force carriers are bosons.
Fermions are represented by quarks,
building blocks that stick together,
and form higher order of matter
like neutrons and protons.
And leptons that are thought of as
a fundamental independent bits of matter.
If you consider a decay like one
we've looked at the first lecture,
a decay of a muon into
an electron neutrino and
antineutrino, you can count
specific numbers like mass,
charge, on the left and
on the right part of the equation.
There is also a quantum number
that is called lepton charge,
or lepton number, which is representing
the difference between the number
of leptons and number of anti-leptons
in an elementary particle reaction.
So, on the left and
on the right part of the equation,
you have this difference equal to one.
Let's introduce one more quantity.
Every matter of particle occupies
a particular column in the table,
you see on the screen,
it is called generation.
So electron belongs to
the first generation, and
muon belongs to the second generation.
So for every decay we can count the number
of leptons of the first generation,
of the second generation,
and of the third generation.
So we have a tuple of free elements
that is called lepton flavor.
Let's remember it for a minute and
it we'll come back to that
factor in a couple of slides,
we know that standard model although
quite powerful, it is not all mighty.
There is no gravity,
no dark matter particles, etc.
There are alternative models like
I've mentioned in the first lecture,
extra dimension model,
or micro black holes.
Among those there is a real princess of such models
called super symmetry, or SUSY for short.
It assumes the existence of
super particles symmetrical
to all particle of standard model,
you can see it on the slide.
There was quite a bit of hope to
discover at least some of those at LHC.
Introduction of those super
partners could explain various
things we have no
reasonable explanation for.
Dark matter phenomena for example.
Another thing, introduction of
this method is unification of
all the forces that suppose to
happen at specific energy level.
So, if we want to compare
to different models.
So we have our basic model or,
standard model in our case or,
or a null hypothesis, and
we have an alternative model hypothesis X.
That, for example, explains some unknown
phenomena, and at the same time, this
alternative model has different prediction
for specific measurable quantity.
For example, a branch inflation will
explain what it is a little bit later
in the next slide for specific decay D.
So we can estimate theoretical
predictions of standard model and
of theory X for this quantity.
Let them call BSM and BX.
So, we make an experimental observation
of D and measure the actual value for
the quantity B observable, and
we measure some uncertainty, sigma.
So, if this value that we measure in
the experiment is too far from BSM,
and close to the prediction of alternative
model, hail to the alternative model.
If it is too far from prediction of the
alternative model, we can forget about it.
Otherwise, we wait for more data.
And here, by the distance,
we mean the for example P value.
So by convention of particle
physics if a measured
quantity sits outside of
five sigma interval, so,
which has probability of
random equation is less
than decimal number,
then the prediction and
then the absorbed value is
considered to be far enough.
So, as for branching fraction.
So, we can consider all different types
of the decay that happen with certain
kind of particles, for example, a Tau
particle can decay into different modes.
So here, you see some examples.
So, and there are different probabilities
for those modes, for example for
electron and electron antineutrino,
the probability is rougly 17%.
For muon and muon antineutrino is 70%,,
it will look less, etc.
And if you want to know all possible decay
outcomes, or so called final states,
you can follow the link that leads to
one of the most important resource
in particle physics,
which is called particle data group.
That has all measure
decays of Tau particle.
[SOUND]